---
layout: post
title: "Go To Statement Considered Harmful"
publish: true
---

**Editor**

For a number of years I have been familiar with the observation that the quality of programmers is a decreasing function of the density of **go to** statements in the programs they produce. More recently I discovered why the use of the **go to** statement has such *disastrous* effects, and I became convinced that the **go to** statement should be abolished from all "high level" programming languages(i.e. everything except, perhaps, plain machine code.) At that time I did not *attach too much importance* to this discovery; I now submit my considerations for publication because in very recent discussions in which the subject turned up, *I have been urged to do so*.

My first remark is that, although the programmer's activity ends when he has constructed a correct program, the process taking place under control of his program is the true *subject* matter of his activity, for it is this process that has to accomplish the desired effect; it is this process that in its dynamic behavior has to satisfy has to satisfy the desired specifications. Yet, once the program has been "making" of the corresponding process is *delegated* to the machine.

My second remark is that our intellectual powers are rather *geared* to master static relations and our powers to visualize processes evolving in time are relatively poorly developed. For that reason we should do(as wise programmers aware of our limitations) our utmost to shorten the conceptual gap between the static program and the dynamic process, to make the correspondence between the program(spread out in text space) and the process(spread out in times) as trivial as possible.

Let us now consider how we can *characterize* the process.(You may think about this question is a very concrete manner: suppose that a process, considered as a time succession of action, is stopped after an arbitrary action, what data do we have to fix in order that we can redo the process until *the very same* point?) If the program text is a pure concatenation of, say assignment statements(for the purpose of this discussion regraded as the description of single action)it is sufficient to point in the program text to a point between two successive action description.(In the absence of **go to** statements I can permit myself the syntactic ambiguity in the last three words of the previous sentence: if we parse them as "successive(action description)" we mean successive in text space; if we parse as "(successive action)description" we mean successive in time.)Let us call such a pointer to a suitable place in the text a "textual index".

When we include how we conditional clauses(**if** B **then** A), alternative clauses(**if** B **then** A1 **else** A2), choice clauses as introduced by C.A.R.Hoare(case[i] of (A1,A2,...,An)), or conditional expressions introduced by J.McCarthy(B1->E1,B2->B2, Bn->En), the fact remains that the progress of the process remains characterized by a single textual index.

As soon as we in include our language procedures we must admit that a single textual index is no longer sufficient. In the case that a textual index points to the interior of a procedure body the dynamic progress is only characterized when we also give to which call of the procedure we refer. With the inclusion of procedures we can characterize the progress of the process via a sequence of textual indices, the length of this sequence being equal to the dynamic depth of procedure calling.

Let us consider repetition clauses(like while B repeat A until B). *Logically speaking*, such clauses are now *superfluous*, because we can express repetition with the aid of recursive procedures. For reasons of realism I don't with to exclude them: on the one hand, repetition clauses can be implemented quite comfortably with present day finite equipped to *retain* our intellectual *grasp* on the processes generated by repetition clauses. With the inclusion of the repetition clauses textual indeces are no longer sufficient to describe the dynamic progress of the process. With each entry in a repetition clause, however, we can associate a so-called "dynamic index", *inexorably* counting the ordinal number of the corresponding current repetition. As the repetition clauses (just as procedure calls) my be applied nestedly, we find that now the progress of process can always be uniquely characterized by a (mixed)sequnce of textual and/or dynamic indices.

The main point is that the values of these indices are outside programmer's control; they are generated(either by the write-up of his program or by the dynamic evolution of the process) whether he wishes or not. They provide **independent coordinates** in which to describe the progress of the process.

Why we need such independent coordinates? The reason is-and this seems to be inherent to sequential processes - that we can interpret the value of a variable only with respect to the progress of the process. If we wish to count the number, n say, of people in an initially empty room, we can achieve this by increasing n by one whenever we see someone entering the room. In the in-between moment that we have observed someone entering the room but have not yet performed the subsequent increase of n, its value equals the number of people in the room minus one!

The *unbridled* use of the go to statement has an immediate consequence that it becomes terribly hard to find a meaningful set of coordinates in which to describe the process progress. Usually, people take into account as well the values of some well chosen variables, but this is out of the question because it is relative the progress that the meaning of these values if to understood! With the go to statement one can, of course, still describe since program start(viz. a kind of normalized clock) The difficulty is that such a coordinate, although unique, is utterly unhelpful. In such coordinate system it becomes an extremely complicated affair to define all those points of the progress where, say, n equals the number of persons in the room minus one!

The go to statement as it stands just too primitive,; it is too much an *invitation* as *bridling* its use. I do not claim that the clauses mentioned are exhaustive in the sense that they satisfy all needs, but whatever clauses are suggested(e.g. abortion clauses) they should satisfy the requirement that a programmer independent coordinate system can be maintained to describe the process in a helpful and manageable way.

It is hard to end with a fair acknowledgement Am I judge by whom my thinking has been influenced? It is fairly obvious that I am not uninfluenced by Peter Landin and Christopher Strachey. Finally I should like to record (as I remember it quite distinctly) how Heinz Zemanek at the pre-ALGOL meeting in early 1959 in Copenhagen quite explicitly expressed his doubts whether the go to statement should be treated on equal syntactic footing with the assignment statement. To modest extent I blame myself not having then drawn the consequences of his remark.

The remark about the undesirability of the go to statement is far from new. I remember having read explicit recommendation to restrict the use of the go to statement to alarm exits, but I have not been able to trace it; presumably, it has been made by C.A.R.Hoare. In together make a remark in the same direction in motivating the case construction:"Like the conditional, it mirrors the dynamic structure of a program more clearly than go to statement and switches, and it eliminates the need to introducing a large number of labels in the programs"

In [2] Guiseppe Jacopini seems to have proved the (logical) superfluousness of the go to statement. The exercise to translate an arbitrary flow diagram more or less mechanically into a jump-less one, however, is not to be recommended. Then the resulting flow diagram cannot be expected to be more transparent than the original one.

### References

Wirth, Niklaus, and Hoare C. A. R. A contribution to the development of ALGOL. Comm. ACM 9 (June 1966), 413-432.
BÖhm, Corrado, and Jacopini Guiseppe. Flow diagrams, Turing machines and languages with only two formation rules. Comm. ACM 9 (May 1966), 366-371.


[something interesting](http://www.iis.sinica.edu.tw/~scm/ncs/2009/07/go-to-considered-harmful/)
